# Introduction to EDR

EDR - Endpoint Detection and response is a security solution designed to monitor, detect and respond to advanced threats at the endpoint level. 

Some of the EDR solutions in the market:
- CrowdSStrike Falcon
- SentinelOne ActiveEDR
- Microsoft Defender of Endpoint
- OpenEDR
- Symantec EDR

Three main features of EDR are:
Visibility, Detection and Response.

---
## Beyond the Antivirus
Both security solutions have the same motive of protecting the endpoint on which they are installed. Both differ in the level of protection they provide. 

The antivirus may detect some basic threats but to detect advanced threats that evade normal detections, EDR is needed. EDR monitors and records the behaviors of the endpoint. An EDR also provides organization-wide visibiltiy of any activity. 

---
## How EDR works?

**Agents**: Multiple endpoints can be integrated with EDR and managed through a centralized console. These agents are also referred as sensors. 

**EDR Console**: All the detailed data sent by the EDR agents is gathered and displayed here through complex logic and machine learning algorithms. 

### What happens after detection ?

When a detection comes through, its a SOC analyst's responsibility to acknowledge the alert and priortize it. The system give severities to all the alerts (critical, high, medium, low, informational). 

### EDR with other tools
It is essential to understand that although  a standalone EDR provids enough information to detect and respond to threats in an endpoint, it works alongside other seucirty solutions to form a larger security ecosystem. Within an network, there are firewalls, DLPs, Email Security gateways, IAMs, EDRs and other security solutions protecting the different components of the network. To minimize effort and maximize the efficieny, all these solutions are integrated with a SIEM solution that becomes the central point of investigation for the anlysts.

---
## EDR telemetry
EDR agents collect different data from their endpoints and push it to EDR console. This data is known as telemetry. 

**Collected telemetry**: 
EDR collects detailed telemtry from the endpoints. 
**Process Execution and Terminations**: keeps track of all the running and idle processes

**Network Connections**: Endpoints' network connections are monitore

**Command Line Activity**: Captures all the commands executed on the endpoints in CMD, PowerSHell, etc, which helps identify malicious command execution

**Files and FOlder Modifications**: Tracks all the files modified

**Registry Modifications**: Any changes to registry will be tracked
  
**EDR** collects much more than this data from an endpoint. Uses complex logic and machine learning algorithms to asses the activities.

---
## Detection and Response Capabilities

### Detection
Based on the telemetry received from endpoint, some advanced detection techniques are applied to this data:

i. **Behavioral Detection**: Instead of just matching the signatures with known threats, it observes the complete behavior of the file. 

ii. **Anomaly Detection**: EDR understands the baseline behavior of the endpoints. Any activity that deviates from this behavior will be flagged.

iii. **IOC matching**: EDRs have some strong threat intelligence field integrations. Except for 0 day attacks, most of the attacks have indicators published in the threat intelligence feeds.

iv **MITRE ATT&CK Mapping**: Malicious activities are also mapped with MITRE Tactic and Techniques.

v. **Machine Learning Algorigthms**: Modern EDRS have ML mdels trained by a large dataset of normal and malicious bhevaiors.

### Response
EDR offers both automated and manual responses. Policies can be made to block malicious hebaiors automatically. 
Manual response gives a wide range of response capabilities such as:

i. **Isolate Host**: During any malicious activity on an endpoint, that endpoint can be isolated through EDR. 
ii. **Terminate Process**: Not every malicious activity requires host isolation. EDRS can terminate the processes
iii. **Quarantine**: Malicious file comes into the endpoint, it can be quarantined. Quarantinie ensures that the file is moved to an isolated location. 
iv. **Remote Access**: Analysts can remotely access the shell of any endpoint. Often through EDRs built-in response is not enough to take action. 
v. **Artefacts Collections**: Commonly extracted artefacts include memory dump, event logs, specific folder contents, registry hives.

---------
# Introduction to SIEM
Security Information and Event Management System (SIEM)

Different Logs are generated by different devices in a network.

## 1. Host-Centric Log Sources
Captures log event that occurred within or related to the host. exmaple: windows, linux, servers, etc. A user accessing a file, user attempting to authenticate, a process execution activity, powershell execution

## 2. Network-Centric Log Sources
Network-related logs are generated when the hosts communicate with each other or access the internet to visit a website. Devices that generate Netowkr logs are firewalls, IDS/IPS, routers etc. Network logs are SSH connection, A file being accessed via FTP, web traffic are some examples of network logs

## Answers Nowhere

* **Numerous log sources**
  A network has many log sources, which generates hundreds of events per second. These logs are scattered accross different devices.
* **No centralization**
  A log resides on the machines on which they are generated, may need to connect with each log source via SSH, RDP, etc to analyze logs from multiple log sources
* **Limited context**
  Individual logs cannot tell the whole story. 
* **Limited Analysis**
  The log sources generate numerous logs per second and analyzing all the logs from all the devices is impossible form human
* **Format Issues** 
  Different log sources generate logs in various formats

---

## Why Siem?
Features of SIEM:
* Centralized Log Collection: Collects logs from all sources and centralizes them in one place. Logs are pulled thru lightweight agents or APIs.
* Normalization of Logs: Logs are of different formats and sizes. A windoes log does not look the same as a linux log. Since SIEM solution centralizes these logs in one palce, it also ensures tha all the logs are broken down into different fields and presented in one consistent format. 
* Correlation of Logs: SIEM correlates the logs of different sources and finds any relationship between them. helps identify malicious activity by analysing its pattern. 

* Real time alerting: SIEM detects malicious activites based on the rules it contains. Many rules come with a SIEM by default. Howecer, analysts make new detection rules are satisfied, alerts are triggered and the analysts are notified.
* Dashboard and Reporting: Dashboards are the most important components of any SIEM. SIEM presents the data for analysis after being normalized and ingested. 

---
## Log Sources and Ingestion
Every device in the network generates somekind of log whenever an activity is performed on it such as a user visitng a website, connecting to SSH, logging into their workstation, etc/ 

### Windows machine
### Linux Machine
Linux OS stores all the related logs, such as events, errors, warnings, etc. These are then ingested into SIEM for continuous monitoring. 
### Web Server

## Log Ingestion
ALl these logs provide a wealth of information and can help identify security issues. Each SIEM solution has its own way of ingesting the logs. 
1. **Agent/Forwarder**: SIEM provide an agent that captures and sends all the important logs to the SIEM server.
2. **Syslog**: A widely used protocols to collect data from various sources
3. **Manual Upload**: Solutions like Splunk, ELK, etc allow users to ingest offline data for quick analysis. Once ingested, it is normalized and made available for analysis.
4. **Port-Forwarding**: SIEM solutions can also be configured to listen on a certain port, and then the endpoints forward the data to the SIEM instance on the listening port.

## Alerting Process and analysis
### How a detection rule is created ?

**Use-case 1**: attckers tend to remove the logs during the post-exploitation phase to remove their tracks. A unique Event ID 104 is logged everytime a user tries to remove or clear event logs.

**Use-case 2**: Adversaries use commands like "whoami" after exploitating and privilege escalation phase. The following fileds will be helpful to include in the rule:
* Log source: Identify the log source capturing the event logs
* Event ID: which Event ID is associated with Process Execution activity
* NewProcessName: Which process name will be helpful to include in the rule?

### Alert Investigation

When monitoiring SIEM, analysts spend most of their time on dashboards, as they display various key details about the network in a very summarized way. Once an alert is triggered, the events/flows associated with the alert are examined, and the rule is checked to see which conditions are met. Based on the investigation, the analyst determines if it's a True or False positive. Some of the actions that are performed after the analysis are:

* Alert is a false positive. May require tuning the rule to avoid similar false positives from occuring again
* alert is a true positive. performing further investigation
* contact the asset owner to inquire about the activity
* suspicious activity is confirmed. isolated the infected host.
* block the suspicious IP
---

# Splunk: The basics

## Splunk forwarder
Lightweight agent installed on the ndpoint to be monitored and its main task is to forward the data collected to the splunk instance.

## Splunk Indexer
Processes the data it receives from forwarder. Parses and normalizes the data into field-value pairs, categorizes it and stores the results as events, making the processed data easy to search and analyze

## Search Head
Is the place within the Search and Reporting APP where users can search the indexed logs. Done using SPL (search processing language)

---
# Elastic Stack: The Basics

## Elastic Stack Overview

ELK was originally developed to store search and visualize large amounts of data. Organizations used it to monitor application performance and perform searches on large datasets. Elastic Stack is a collection of different open-source components that work together to collect data from any source, store and search it and visualize it in real time.

1. **Elasticsearch**: Full-text search and analystics engine for JSON-formatted documents. Stores, analyzes and correlates data and supports a RESTful API for interacting with it
2. **Logstash**: data processing engine that takes data from different sources, filters it or normalizes it and sends it to the destination, could be kibana or listening port. Divided into 3 parts, input, filter, output.
3. **Beats**: Beats ar ehost-based agents known as data-shippers that ship/transfer data from the endpoints to Elasticsearch. Each beat is a single-purpose agent that sends specific data to Elasticsearch.
4. **Kibana**: Web-based data visualization tool that works with elastic search to analyze investigate and visualize data streams in real time. 

**How they work together**
* Beats collect data from multiple agents.
* Collects data from beats, ports, or files, parses/normalizes it into field value pairs and stores them into Elasticsearch
* Elasticsearch acts as a database used to search and analyze data
* Kibana is responsible for displaying and visualizing the data stored in Elasticsearch. The data stored can be easily shaped into different visualizations, time charts, infographics, etc using kibana

---
## KQL Overview

i. **Free text search**: 
like searching for "United states"
What if looking for the term united only? in that case Searc query would be: United*

ii. **Logical Operators (AND | OR | NOT)**:
AND: "United states" AND "Virginia"
OR: "United states" OR "Virginia"
NOT: "UNITED STATES" AND NOT ("Florida")


### Field based search:
Syntax= Filed: Value
Example: Source_ip : 238.163.231.224 AND UserName : Jack
This means we're asking Kibana to display all the logs in which source_ip is 238.163.231 and username is jack/

---
# Introduction to SOAR

Some key capabilities of a SOC includes:
**Monitoring and Detection**
**Recovery and Remediation**
**Threat Intelligence**
**Communication**

Some challenges faced by SOCs:
i. Alert fatigue: Too many false positive alerts or insufficient for an investigation, leaving analysts overwhelmed and unable to address any serious security events/
ii. Too many diconnected Tools: COntext switching. Sec Teams are tasked with navigating through firewall logs and rules, which are handled independently from endpoint security logs. 
iii. Manual Processes: SOC investigation procedures are often not documented, leading to inefficient means of addressing threats. Most rely on established tribal knoweldge bult by expereince analyst.


## Overcoming Challenges with SOAR

SOAR is Security Operations Automation and Response. A tool that unifies all the security tools used in a SOC. With SOAR, SOC analysts do not need to sqitch between SIEM, EDR, Firewall and other security tools for their investigations. Also provides ticketing and case management features to the analysts, through which they can document, track and resolve their incidents in a structured way.

1.**Orchestration**: While investigating an alert, the analyst has to switch between tools like SIEM, Threat Intelligenec, IAM tool and Ticketing system. This slows down the process. Orchestration solves this problem by coordinating all these tools together inside the SOAR. Connects different tools from various vendors within the unified SOAR interface. Defines workflows for investigating various types of alerts, known as Playbooks.

2. **Automation**: Automating the manual tasks  of context-switching and finding the alert. 

3. **Response**: Gives ability to take actions using different tools from one unified interface. Also automates the response, through its Automation capabilitiy. Example: SOAR can follow the playbook of VPN Brute force and automatically block the IP on the firewall, disable the user in the IAM and open a ticket with all the details.

*A playbook is a predefined list of actions to handle an incident*

## Building SOAR Playbooks

